you want to learn how to use dock Angela
and I know you're serious about it
because you saw the length of this video
and you clicked on it anyway I'm excited
to teach you it I'm not going to waste
any of your time and it really does take
this much time to get a good grasp on
how to use duick especially as a
beginner to get up and running and start
animating characters in After Effects
I'm going to teach you how to prep your
artwork for rigging get it into After
Effects create a skeleton system that
can be rigged with doick and how to use
Duck's automatic Walk and Run cycles
what I've done is set up two different
character designs that you can download
follow along with me and you can even
download my project file and dig around
through it yourself I've added chapters
to every part of this video so if
there's a section that you think you
already understand or something that you
want to jump around to just use those
chapters to do it but enough talk let's
get into
it I've created two different character
designs to be rigged with doick and you
can download both of them just follow
the link in the description you could
also use your own artwork but there are
definitely some design considerations
that you need to make before you go to
rig inside of After Effects and
especially if you don't have any
experience rigging then just go ahead
and use my character designs because
I've made them very specifically and I
want to walk you through what exactly
that looks like so on each of these
characters there's a layer at the top
called guides and you'll notice that
there are just these circles on all of
the joints of each character these are
very important for rigging in order to
make joints very seamless because if I
grab this arm and maybe the hand to and
then move the Anchor Point to the center
of that Circle and then rotate it you'll
notice that the bend in the elbow is
perfect you can't see any kind of seam
or or anything misaligning whereas if I
were to move that Anchor Point to say
about here and then rotate well now
we're going to have some problems and
this is going to come up much further
along in the rigging process than you
want to deal with to have to come all
the way back to the drawing board and
modify your artwork and then reig
everything so it is very important that
as a beginner your joints are perfectly
circular once you get into more advanced
rigging you can mess with the shape of
those joints but for this tutorial and
for most clean looking character designs
you're going to want those perfectly
circular joints and if I press
controller command y to switch to
outline view you'll notice that there
are perfect circles all throughout my
character design at all of those joints
even between the hips and the Torso now
another thing you need to think about is
how big should your character be what is
the resolution that you want to work at
I've made my artboard 2000 x 2000 so if
I were to make a rectangle and I'll make
it 1920 x 1080 so I can see an HD frame
I'll switch that to outline this is what
my character is going to look like
within a 1920 x 1080 frame at 100% scale
meaning if I were to zoom in to crop
maybe to just the Torso of this
character I'm going to switch my view
and illustrator to the pixel preview
right here and then zoom in and you'll
notice we're not going to get very good
resolution and you might think well this
is illustrator artwork it can just
convert it to shape layers or
continuously rasterize those layers
don't get in that mindset think of these
as flat layers with rigging and after
effects and using doick it's going to
get complicated and even break things if
you use shape layers or continuously WRA
masterize so just think of Illustrator
as if this is a flat image not Vector
artwork and create your character at
whatever resolution you need for the
maximum amount of basically cropping in
so if I wanted to be able to crop in to
just this amount of my character I'm
going to have to scale him up much
larger and that's fine you can work with
the 4,000 x4000 pixel comp and after
effects will handle that it might take
longer to render but it's necessary if
you want to have clean artwork at 100%
scale now again for this tutorial I
don't need that so I'm going to leave it
where it was but another thing that's
very important to do is labeling your
layers properly just like Ben Marriot
would want it in order to make the
rigging process as simple as possible
using duck we're going to need to label
our layers properly so I've named
everything how you'd expect it to and
I've used R for right L for left and
I've labeled my limbs according to the
characters side so right arm would be
the character's right arm what we're
seeing as the left side of the screen
that little bit isn't as critical but it
makes the most sense in my head so work
with whatever way makes sense to you the
important thing is that you actually
label everything properly and you can
use underscores dashes whatever you want
but this is how I like to format my
layers so R toes R foot R calf follow
this naming structure and rigging with
doick is going to be much simpler
another thing you need to think about is
what should the range of motion be for
your character what does it actually
need to be able to do should it be able
to do a walk cycle or is it just going
to be a character standing there looking
at their phone the way that you
illustrate your character and the pose
that you put them in is going to limit
or extend what they're able to do once
you go to rig them I've used a three
quarters pose kind of for both of these
Rigs and you can do a lot with that type
of pose you'll notice that their feet
are not perfectly aligned their
shoulders are at an angle it's offset so
it can give the character more range
allow them to look off to the side or at
the camera it can also work for walk
Cycles although if all you're trying to
do is create a walk cycle you might want
to do a completely profile view where
they're looking straight to one side for
Reese this character right here I made a
neck that's able to bend and you'll see
with that outline view there's a
rotation Point here and here for the
head to rotate around the neck but also
if I were to grab all of these together
I could rotate the neck around that
joint now on Becky I designed her in a
way that made that a little bit more
difficult because her neck really tapers
up at the top so instead of trying to
modify my artwork to fit that type of a
movement I just made the conscious
decision that I don't need to be able to
rotate her neck around there that's kind
of a weird movement anyway I don't know
that I really would ever need to move
her neck in that way so instead I kept
the design the way that I wanted it to
and decided I'm just going to rotate her
head around that neck joint instead of
the entire thing with the neck being
able to move as well so before bothering
with setting up all these perfect joints
and everything think about what the
range of motion your character should be
and design accordingly also don't try to
over complicate things keep your designs
very simple these characters are
actually pretty complex even though they
are clean simple looking designs they
are kind of complex when it comes to how
many joints there are and how everything
works together so don't over complicate
your designs one last little tip while
we're still in illustrator is to give
your limbs a little bit of a Bend it's
okay to actually pose your character and
you can see that on this character over
here a little more I spread out her legs
this one is slightly bent If You Give a
Little Bit of Bend to the limb that's
going to help dock know which way you
want the arm or the leg to bend once
it's rigged this again is not essential
but if you do this little step in the
character design phase it's just going
to make things even simpler once we're
in After
Effects the first thing I want to do is
rearrange my workspace because with
rigging and character animation you're
going to be dealing with lots of layers
and you need to see most of them at the
same time so I'm going to completely
rearrange my entire workspace right now
and I'm even going to go ahead and
remove myself because we need as much
space as possible so I'm going to close
that out and the first thing I'll do is
grab my timeline and the way I like to
work is putting this all the way on the
left side of my workspace where you see
that green highlight so that it's docked
on the left side that way all of my
layers are going to have all this
vertical space to work with next I'm
going to close the panels I don't need
like the character panel I'm not going
to be doing anything like that so I'll
close all of these up I'll keep my
composition docked over here and close
out these other two panels my project
and effect controls those are important
so I'll keep them there and I'm going to
go ahead and save this as a new
workspace if I come up to window and I
go down to workspace I'll say save as
new workspace and I'll call this one
character rigging click okay and now I
can access that within this menu right
here so I can switch between this and
any other workspace just by clicking on
it now I can import my artwork so I'll
double click on the project panel and
find one of the characters I'm going to
use Reese so I'll double click on that
and the way we're going to import this
is as a composition whether you design
your character in illustrator or
photoshop either way you're going to
want to import it as a composition and
make sure that you're retaining the
layer sizes so choose layer size as the
footage dimension
click okay and that will bring
everything in as a comp all the artwork
just how I saw it inside of Illustrator
now you're going to need dock Angela
installed on your machine and if you
don't already have it follow the link in
the description follow the instructions
on how to install it and then we can
jump back in with duick installed you
can come up to window and you'll find it
in this list there's a lot of panels
that can be installed additionally that
allow you to open different parts of
duick as their own panels uh but duck
Angela is what we need so I'm going to
open that one up it is is a very large
script so it might take a little bit to
initially start up but I want to quickly
point out that I am on version
17.0.0 and inevitably there will be bugs
that will be caught features might
change labels might change slightly so
if your doick doesn't look like mine
maybe you're watching this video 6
months or even a year after it was
published check your version against
mine down here in the bottom right
corner that might be why and if there
are any frequently asked questions or
issues that come up things that change
that I think I should address I'll put
it in a a pinned comment down below
maybe also in the description check both
places but if you have a question
there's a good chance somebody has
already asked it so make sure that you
check for a pin comment or the
description first now again if you're
brand new to this I would suggest that
you go to the settings which is in the
bottom left corner go to edit settings
and change the UI mode to rookie if you
click on the little hamburger menu you
can see there's rookie standard and
expert if you change it to rookie and
click apply this is going to give you
text labels on a lot of the buttons
where they wouldn't be otherwise once
you're used to the controls and you
understand what the icons mean then you
won't have to rely on these labels and
you'll save a little bit more space But
as a beginner I would encourage you to
change that UI to rookie I'm going to go
ahead and dock that in this section of
my workspace right down here in the
bottom quadrant so that it Stacks with
these other two and I have plenty of
room to see everything within doick I'm
going to go ahead and save my project
and I'm just going to work off of the
desktop and I want to point out that my
composition defaulted to whatever I had
it set up last so if I go to my
composition settings you'll notice that
I'm working at 24 frames per second you
don't have to work at 24 frames per
second change that to whatever you want
but I would suggest that you change the
duration to something long like at least
30 seconds if not a minute because you
might not know how long the character's
animation actually needs to be it's very
unlikely it'll ever need to be 1 minute
but that's kind of just what I default
to so that I have plenty of room to work
with and I don't have to extend any
layers later on in the process so this
is doick and there are so many things
that this tool can do other than just
rigging your characters there are
features of the script that I haven't
never used let alone even learned about
so don't be overwhelmed with how much is
actually crammed in here I'm going to
walk you through exactly what you need
to do to get up and running and rigging
your first character the first step of
the process is to actually create a
skeleton for your character sized to the
design that you created so that you can
attach all the artwork to it and doick
is then going to rig up that skeleton
which is now acting as a parent system
basically for your artwork that you can
then move around sound like a puppet and
you can do some really complicated
rigging using doick you can involve the
puppet tool to do much more organic
distortions we're not going to get into
any of that it's going to be a very
simple rigid character rig but it is
kind of a long process that you need to
follow certain steps in order to get
where you want to be at the end so I'm
going to walk you through my process and
what I think is one of the most
efficient ways to get from artwork to a
rigged character that you can animate
with one of the biggest new features in
duick Angela is the introduction of open
cutout format meta rigs open cutout is a
new format created by the developers of
doick that allows you to basically make
presets of skeletons for any creatures
that you want compatible with Duck's
Auto rigging system so if I click on
this button you'll see that there's lots
of different types of creatures in here
that we can choose from so I could go
into the bird section and we have a
chicken and a rooster if I go back out
there's a fish or let's go into the last
one there's a pig character right here
so I'm going to give it a name we'll
just call this pig Chuck and then double
click on this and dock is going to
create all of the bones necessary to
make up the skeleton for a pig
character and I can actually make this a
little more apparent what's going on if
I switch over to the bones tab select
those bones and go into the settings and
enable the envelope this is going to
show you basically a reference of where
all of those perfectly circular overlaps
are and how the artwork that you
designed to fit this skeleton might work
it serves as a really great reference
for design ing characters but it's
completely customizable all of these
bones are an apparent chain so you can
adjust where they are let's say you
weren't designing a pig though let's get
rid of that comp I'll go back into the
open cutout tab jump back out into the
hominoid structure this is what a human
is and we have advanced and simple I'm
just going to go with simple again
double click on it to build all of the
bones for that skeleton and once again
if I enable that envelope I'll select my
bones go to the Bone settings enable the
envelope and apply this is a really
useful tool for being able to create
your designs on top of because you can
adjust the proportions of your character
and everything in between will update I
could grab this arm go to the Bone
envelope effect and change the size so
you could start your character design
work inside of After Effects playing
around with a structure and getting it
the way that you think you want your
character to be designed take a
screenshot of this bring it into
illustrator or photoshop and design your
artwork directly on top of that skeleton
in the future the developers of duck
want to make this open cutout format
available in other software to make this
process even simpler but for now even
just taking a screenshot is such a help
in designing your character to fit a
duick meta rig and the other amazing
thing about this is that you can save
custom meta rigs reuse them share them
so this entire list can grow as you
create more characters and as the do it
Community contributes to making this a
larger library now like I said I'm not
going to be using the open cutout format
for this particular character and it'll
make sense why in just a minute but I'm
just going to go ahead and delete that
comp and go into the second tab which is
bones and if you've used duck Bassel
before you might be a little bit
confused because the terminology has
changed a little bit in Bassel
structures was the name of these layers
that make up a skeleton they're now
renamed bones because that just makes a
little more sense it's the bones the
literal bones that make up the skeleton
of your Rick and Bones in duick Bassel
are now called pins because once again
it just makes more sense bones in Bassel
really served as pins so that's why
they've been renamed as pins in Duck
Angela now I'm going to go ahead and
start creating bones for my Reese
character so I'm going to close out of
my Bon settings and again I have this
list of all different types of creatures
I'm working with a hominoid character so
that's where I'm going to be working now
first things first I'm going to give my
character a name because this will help
with labeling so I'm going to say Reese
as the character and then just click off
for a second before I get into any bone
creat ation I want to First prepare my
artwork in the comp in fact I want to
make a duplicate of this comp so that I
can always get back to this in case I
ever need to so I'm just going to rename
this one with a one at the beginning and
say Reese artwork and then I'll
duplicate it and rename this one to
Reese bones then I'll make sure that I
double click that comp so I'm working on
it and start making some bone structures
now you could use that mattera rig and
put all of your bones in at once and
then line up everything to its
corresponding part of the character
which is how I used to work with duick
Bassel but with duick Angela I think
there's a much faster way so again I'm
going to stay in the bone section and
I'm going to first just choose let's say
the character's right arm and turn on my
guide's layer that way I can see exactly
where all of these joints are what I
want to do is move the Anchor Point for
each one of these layers to their
corresponding joints so for the arm
layer I'll zoom in nice and close switch
to my Anchor Point tool with Y on the
keyboard and then click and drag that up
to this circle now as I'm dragging this
around the resolution dropped a lot
that's because of the Adaptive
resolution of after effects if I make my
workspace a little bit bigger and I
click right here you'll see adaptive
resolution is enabled I'm going to turn
that off this may decrease performance
but I think it makes it easier to see
what I'm doing so I'm just going to
leave it off and then I can click and
drag this around to move it right in the
middle of the circle now if I want to be
super precise and really with rigging
you should be precise I'm actually going
to right click on the guides layer go to
create and say shapes from vector layer
so that this is now an actual shape
layer that gives me access to the paths
of each one of these circles because I
have access to those Vector shapes I can
actually snap to that artwork so again
I'm going to go back to this arm I'm
going to press y to get my Anchor Point
tool click and drag the Anchor Point
while holding control or command to
temporarily enable snapping and you'll
see that it snaps right to the center of
that Circle all right so that's the
first step I'm going to do this same
thing for the rest of the arm so I'll
grab the forearm layer click and drag
this while holding control or command
and I want to point out that sometimes
snapping for whatever reason just
doesn't want to go where you want it to
so if I zoom in all the way and try
again it might land in the middle there
we go but that was a struggle I'm not
sure why this is but every now and then
you'll run into that issue and not get
it to successfully snap so what you
could do to get around that is just try
to eyeball it and actually this circle
right here is a great example I just
whatever I do I cannot get it to snap in
the center of that layer so I could
either let go of controller command so
that snapping isn't a factor and guess
where it is or I could grab that guide's
layer and search for scale and every
single one of these circles is in a
shape group that has transformed
controls so I could change the scale of
all of these groups if I select all of
them not the transform scale for the
layer but all the groups and just change
this down to say 20 and now they're
going to be much tinier dots and I don't
have to worry so much about getting it
in the center of these circles now as I
do just getting my Anchor Point over
that dot so that's one workaround now
that I have my anchor points lined up I
can create bones for that Limb and I can
do it in a really intelligent way I'm
going to start with the part of the limb
that's closest to the body the root of
the limb so the arm then shift click on
the forearm and then shift click on the
hand so you're starting at the root and
working your way to the tip of the limb
with them selected in that order I can
now click on the hominoid section and go
to the arm button but I'm not going to
click on the arm button itself I'm
actually going to go to the arm options
just to show you that you can choose not
only how many bones are going to be
generated but also labeling options so
this is on the front side of the body so
I want it to be on the front it's also
the character's right arm but this is
labeled left so I'm going to click on it
to change it to right so that it'll be
labeled as the front right arm I don't
need a shoulder bone because I don't
have that in my my artwork so I'm going
to leave that unchecked but then I'm
going to click on the arm button but I'm
also going to hold down control which is
going off the screen a little bit but if
I highlight over that again holding down
control or command on a Mac will Auto
parent the selection to the new bones so
because I selected these in the correct
order if I hold control and I click on
arm it's going to generate those bones
and align them to the Anchor points of
that artwork and I can't overstate how
much that simplifies the rigging process
when I don't have to go realign all
these bone Str structures to the artwork
it just makes things go so much quicker
all I need to do is grab the tip of my
limb and move it to the tip of the
fingers since this is an arm that I'm
rigging I'm going to move that to the
tip of the fingers now these colors are
a little hard to see on top of my
particular character art so what I'm
going to do is select all of those bone
layers which I might point out are named
according to the layer type so bone the
character name that I typed in Rees and
then the corresponding bone names as
well as their location on the rig but
with them selected I'll go to my bone
settings I can change their color I'll
uncheck envelope and I'll just pick a
random color until it's something that I
like maybe this one will look good and
click apply and now I can see that bone
much easier and not only are the bones
aligned with where they need to be
according to the artwork the artwork has
been parented to those bones because of
the way that I had them selected from
the root to the tip so I could rotate
this bone and the arm is going to rotate
with it we've already got a working FK
rig all right let me undo that and I'm
going to show you a different method for
rigging up the other arm and to make
this easier to see I'm just going to
solo the guides layer as well as the
left hand forearm and arm layers and
let's turn on the background actually
I'm going to go to my composition
settings and I'm going to change the
background color of my composition to be
this light gray this doesn't actually
change anything about my comp other than
the preview color for that background so
even with that layer gone the background
will now be light gray instead of black
this doesn't actually affect the render
it's just the preview of the comp when
nothing is in the background now the
second method for creating bones in
duick is to actually draw a path so I'm
going to switch over to my pen tool and
I'm going to add a point on each one of
these joint markers I'm not going to add
any curves but I am going to finish it
off by putting a fourth point at the tip
of the limb now this is a little bit
more difficult to be super precise so
I'm going to zoom in here I might even
change the width of this down to one so
I can see that dot nice and clearly but
I want to put each point of my path
right in the center of each one of these
joints and it looks like I was off a
little bit so it is important to get in
there and make sure that you're being
precise but now with that path drawn I
can back out of my bone settings click
on hominoid go into the arm settings and
again change my labels this time it's
not going to be on the front it'll be on
the back and it is the left arm doick is
intelligent enough to know that I just
did the right arm so the next time I'm
probably going to do the left arm and
and actually I need to make sure that
not only is the layer selected but the
path itself is selected so I'll switch
to my pen tool grab any one of these
points and then click on the arm button
and what dock is going to do is draw
bones aligned to that path using the
vertex points as the anchor points for
each joint this is another really
fantastic new way of creating bones for
your character artwork I just have to do
a little bit more to get things parented
to them you'll also notice that it took
the comp name as the character name so
what I want to do is Select these bones
I'll go into my bone settings and again
let's change the color let's apply that
first just so it's easier to see let's
go through until we find something that
will stand out nicely that green that'll
probably work okay next I'll uncheck the
color and we'll go to the character's
name this needs to be Rees I'll apply
that and there we go the name updates it
is the back left arm so everything else
there looks good now the artwork was not
automatically parented to the path as
far as I know that's not possible but
there is a very intelligent way of
automatically linking your art to your
bones using this link art button so I'm
going to select these three layers and
again because I labeled these properly
duck is going to try to guess what bones
these should be parented to so I'll
click on the link art button and if I
make this a little bit bigger so we can
see they've now been parented to those
bones and if I rotate the bones sure
enough everything is parented up with a
single button click now that did rename
my artwork to match kind of the naming
structure of everything else else that
doesn't really bother me but you can
always rename this back to what it
originally was now that process did take
a few more steps but I think it's worth
knowing about because there are certain
situations where maybe you just want to
draw that path and create bones very
quickly the next section of my character
that I want to focus on is the spine
starting at the hips and moving all the
way to the tip of the head so I'm just
going to solo the layers that I need to
see for that including the guides and
let's see my neck and the hips and I
don't need to see that arm so I'll get
rid of that so there we go we've got the
Torso and the head of the character I
need to move the anchor points for these
layers where I want them to be able to
rotate so for the hips I want that to be
right in between the two Hip joints
basically so centered between these two
dots the Torso I want to go right over
that dot the neck layer I want that to
rotate around this Dot and the head I
want to go over this point right here
with all that done I can treat the spine
in the same way that I did with the
first arm I can select them in the order
of the root which would be the hips all
the way to the tip so I'll grab the hips
then the Torso then the neck and then
the head exit out of my bone settings go
into the hominoid this time choose spine
into the settings and this is where I'm
going to customize how many layers I
want generated I do want the hips but I
don't need three spine sections there's
just one big layer for the Torso here so
I'm going to change that down to one the
ne will also consist of one I do want a
head bone so with that done I'll control
click on spine and this again builds the
bones aligned to all of the anchor
points all I have to do is reposition
this last point to be the tip of the
head and everything else is parented up
except for the artwork that I had not
already parented so let me grab all the
facial features and I'll parent that to
the head and I'll grab the neck Shadow
and parent that to the neck but now I
can grab any one of these bones and
rotate this to see see if everything is
working the way it should and sure
enough it is working out great now I'm
just going to quickly repeat this
process for each one of these legs again
the process is identical I'm just going
to move the anchor points to the Joint
markers generate bones and automatically
have the artwork parented to it and
while you watch me do this I want to
quickly just ask that if you're not
subscribed to my channel click that
subscribe button so that you can always
be up to date with what I'm putting out
there and if you like the way this
tutorial is going click that like button
both of those things really help me
reach more people here on YouTube helps
me grow my channel so that I can educate
more people on how to do cool things
like used dock Angela really appreciate
it now in the leg settings I've created
this artwork to have toes split off from
the foot so I'm going to make sure that
toes is
checked I'm going to change the label
from the back to the front and that will
exit me out of that so I'm going to need
to get back into the leg settings and
instead of the left leg this is the
right leg so I'm going to switch that
around hold down control and click on
leg those bones will be generated and
aligned to the joints of the artwork and
I can zoom in the only other thing that
is different about the leg from the arms
is that we have a toe bone and a heel
bone that I need to align in that order
so I'm just going to grab my toe bone
and I'm going to move that directly on
the tip of the toes and then grab my
heel and hold shift so that it only
moves horizontally and move it right to
the tip of the heel this is important
for how dock is going to handle the rig
for the foot a little bit later now I'll
just finish this up with the other leg
in the exact same way and with that my
skeleton is complete I have both arms
both legs the spine and we can move on
to Auto
riging so I'm going to once again go
back to my project panel and duplicate
this comp I'll rename it three
Rees rig double click on it to get into
that comp and I no longer need these
guide layers so I'm just going to go a
and delete them out of my comp I don't
need this background layer so I'll get
rid of it and all I have to do to
convert this simple parent system into
an actual rigged skeleton is select all
the bones which I can do with this
button right here and then go down to
Auto rig and click the button now duick
is going to warn me this is going to go
a lot slower if all of my layer controls
are visible but all I have to do is
click on this check boox and it's going
to eliminate all of these overlays
there's lots of shape layers and
expressions driving this entire system
and the overlays are what cause after
effects to lag so that's why we're going
to hide them when I click that check
mark and while that happens I want to
encourage you to donate to Dudi the
creator of duick who runs RX labs and
makes duick freely available for anyone
who wants to use it if you use duick in
any kind of creative capacity it only
makes sense to support the creators and
what I like to do is add in a doick fee
to any kind of client work that uses
doick and the client doesn't have to
know about it but that way there's a
constant fun being fed back into the
development and Improvement of this tool
thank you so much Dudi for all that you
do for this community keep up the great
work now I purposely let that play back
in real time so you can get a sense for
how long it takes but all things
considered that really wasn't any time
at
all and now we have a lot more stuff
going on in our comp the very first
thing I want to do is just hide the
bones which since I have my bones panel
still open I can click the show hide
bones button that will eliminate all of
the bones since I'm done with them I
don't need to modify them anymore I
don't need to see them so I'm just going
to disable their visibility to help with
render time now if I take a look at my
layers I've got a lot more and if I make
a little bit more room for myself you'll
notice that all of these duck generated
layers have tags with the marker system
so it's easy to identify but it also
helps dock keep track of what's what so
don't modify these markers leave them as
is but with the color coding and the
tagging system it makes working with
these layers much easier the top set of
layers all start with Ctrl for control
these are the controllers that drive all
of the bones that have now been
converted into an actual rigged system
and these are what will drive all of the
artwork if I grab this hand and move it
up you'll see that the arm is now
bending the way that you would expect it
to just by positioning the hand wherever
you want it I can rotate this hand
around if I use W to switch to my
rotation tool I can grab one of these
legs and lift it up to see it Bend
rotate the foot around there's lots of
really great stuff but before you go
wild with this undo back to the initial
State before anything is changed select
all of your controller layers and press
P so that you can see all of these
numbers on the position values for all
the controllers are values that you just
simply can't memorize if you ever wanted
to get back to this position and you
haven't already set key frames it's
going to be impossible to do that what I
want you to do is select all these
layers and deselect the ones that are
already zeros so that would be the Torso
and the hips and then come over to your
duick panel and we're going to go to
this third tab links and constraints and
there's a button in here called add zero
when I click on this dock is going to
generate nulls that are in the exact
same position as each one of these
controllers and parent each controller
to those nulls so that the relative
position between the controller and the
null is zero meaning I can move this
hand wherever I want and if I want to
get back to where it was all I have to
do is put in 0 0 on the position and
it's right where it should be that's the
first thing I always do after clicking
Auto rig just so I know that I can
always get back to this pose next I want
to clean up my comp a little bit because
there are just so many layers in here
and a lot of them I don't need to see so
what I want to do first is lock all of
these bone layers as well as all of the
artwork all the artwork layers are now
being driven by the rig so I don't need
access to them I just need them to be
visible I also want to shy all of these
layers so I'm going to click and drag
all the way down so that nothing but the
controllers are unshy and then I'll
click the shy switch that way I'm not
concerned with all that extra clutter
and I can just work with these
controllers now let's take a look at
what these controllers do and what we
can do to clean them up a little bit
first of all there's one right over top
of the head it's a skull icon this
obviously is the head controller but I
don't like it being over top of my
character's face so I'm going to go into
this effect that's on this controller
layer into the icon and there's a
position value if I change the
exposition I can shift this off to the
side and that's typically what I like to
do since it's over to the side now I'm
not covering up my artwork but I can
still use it to rotate the head around I
can even move the position of it and the
neck will bend around with it I just
need to be careful not to pull it too
far because the head will separate from
the body but I'll just undo that the
next controller down the line is the
shoulders and neck what this controller
allows you to do is move the shoulders
and the joints attached to it around
without moving the hips so the Torso is
rotating with that shoulders controller
but you'll notice that the head is
staying upright and nothing below the
hips is changing let me undo that and
we'll move down to the next controller
which is the Torso now this is right at
the waist basically I want to move this
up so I'll go into the icon and I'll
shift it up on the Y but that's really
difficult to look at that blue color on
top of this salmony pink so what I want
to do is change the color as well I'm
just going to change it to White this
controller is similar to the shoulders
except everything is going to rotate
with it so you see that the neck is
pointing wherever I'm moving the Torso
the head is staying upright however but
it's rotating the Torso around the hips
right where that Anchor Point is
actually next in the controller list is
the body controller and this is kind of
the most important one I'm going to move
it out to the left I'm going to change
its size to be larger not that large but
maybe something like this and let's push
it out to the left a little bit further
what this controller does is move the
entire spine structure so as I move this
around you'll see that every everything
in the spine is moving with it the hips
the Torso the shoulders and the head all
at once if I rotate it everything again
is rotating with it except for the head
which by the way if I clicked on the
head controller and I Collapse this up
and we take a look at the last effect in
the list the head follow if I check that
box now it's going to rotate so that's
an option that you can enable or disable
to your taste or to whatever your
character needs to do but this
controller is sometimes referred to as
the center of gravity I usually just
call it the body controller but if you
want to move your character around this
is how you do it don't grab the Torso
and move it up and down cuz that's going
to mess with the hips don't grab the
shoulder controller and move it around
cuz that's not going to do anything that
you want it to use the body controller
all right I'm going to reset that by
bringing up the position and rotation
and just zeroing those numbers out and
then the final controller in the spine
is the hips now that's where I want it
to be what this is going to allow you to
do is rotate those hips again without
rotating any other part of the spine and
that's how I would suggest you use it
don't grab it to move it around because
this is going to cause some issues with
other parts of your rig use the body
controller to move things around instead
now to be honest I don't use the
shoulder torso or hips controllers very
often and I don't want them cluttering
up my character rig so I'm going to
select all three of them and just turn
their visibility off and I'll even lock
them just so I don't accidentally mess
with them now as far as the other limbs
go we have the hand controllers and
their icons are defaulted to again
overlapping the joint and they're
oriented upwards I'm going to go into
the anchor and I'm going to rotate it
around so it's 180° downwards it's
aligned with my hand now and then I'll
just shift this down as well on the Y
AIS I'll do the same thing for this hand
to go in change the orientation and
shift it down now I can grab either one
of these hands pick up the arm rotate
the hand around and just make sure that
my icon is not overlapping the artwork
now if you remember back when I I was
talking about the artwork prep I put a
little bit of a Bend into the limb and
that helped doick to know which way
wanted the limb to bend when it created
the rig but every now and then you will
get the bend happening in the opposite
direction that you expected to to fix
that issue you just need to go into the
hand or the foot controller go into the
ik effect and change the side from 100%
to negative 100% or vice versa this way
it will bend in the opposite direction
and maybe you do want it to bend in the
opposite direction of the way that you
actually drew the artwork so I could put
his hand on his hip there this way both
elbows are bent outwards instead of them
both bending to the same direction okay
I'll zero those positions back
out and each foot control is very
similar but it does have a few extra
features so first of all let's change
the icon so that it's rotated 90° and
then pushed out into the front and maybe
below the foot I'll do the same thing
for this one as well
90° push it down and that one I'll
actually where it is but this way I can
grab each one individually and pick up
the legs now some extra controls that
each one of these has if I just spread
the legs out a little bit I'll take a
look at these effects again giving you
the same ik system controls but the foot
Roll Effect is a really really great
feature and why I separated the toes
from the foot in my character artwork if
I grab the foot roll angle and I
increase it you'll see that the
character is basically bending up on his
toes lifting the heel but keeping the
toes in place or if I back it up to a
negative Direction it will rotate back
on the heel this is why I had to place
the bones for the toes and the heel on
those legs if I undo that I could also
just bend the toes on their own or I
could raise the foot up on a tiptoe
without
bending or I could back up the heel or
stretch it downwards rotating off of
that heels Point these are some very
Advanced rig controls that are all set
up automatically so long as you've
prepared prepared your artwork correctly
and placed your bones precisely with all
of that done let's zero out everything
I'll just select everything press P to
bring up all the position and type in 0
0 so that we're back in our neutral
position now one last bit of cleanup
that I want to do on my rig if I zoom in
you'll notice there's a DOT on the
Anchor Point of each one of these
controllers on this body it's hidden by
the pants but there we go the wrist is
right under the watch there and there's
a DOT on each one of the shoes I don't
particularly like seeing the Anchor
Point and it makes the bounding box for
selecting the controllers much larger it
contains that dot within it so what I
like to do and I'll actually unlock all
of my controllers to do this is select
all my controllers and then search for
size because there's a property in the
icon effect for the Anchor Point size so
what I want to do is Select each one of
these with controller command while
clicking on each one and once I have
each one of these selected I can change
all of them at the same time to be a
value of zero and as I did that you saw
that the bounding box changed for all
these controllers and now only exists
around the actual icon with the layers
Anchor Point where that dot was I think
this is just a much cleaner way to work
so it's what I typically do with my
controllers I'll just make sure to lock
up these three that I'm not using
anymore and this rig is now ready to be
animated now what I want to do is
duplicate that comp one more time and
I'll rename this one for
Rees and we're going to take a look at
one of my very favorite features of dock
which is the automatic walk or run cycle
so we're going to switch over to the
Automation and expressions tab I'm going
to select all of my controllers again
I'll need to unlock the ones I'm not
using even though I don't plan to use
them to animate it is important that
they're selected for this part of the
process so I'm going to select all those
controllers come over to my walk run
cycle and again I'll click on the
settings button instead of clicking the
Run button so that we can see what's
happening because the way that all the
layers are named and tagged with Mark
doick is able to identify which
controller should be used for each part
of the body for anything that's missing
or something that you're not using in
your character rig that'll just be set
to none but this is a way to verify that
it's pulling the correct controllers for
each part of the body with that all
verified I'm going to click on the walk
run cycle and doick is going to run some
magic in the background my character's
pose is going to change and something
really cool is going to happen let me
make a little bit more room in here so I
can actually see my timeline and I'll
actually disable these switches here and
I'll just set my work area to be 1
second so we'll go to the 23 frame Mark
Press n to set my work area and then
preview this and just like that my
character is walking not a single key
frame was set by myself it's just
happening and this is just a mindblowing
thing if you're new to character
animation believe me this is not an easy
thing to pull off and the fact that we
just clicked a button and the character
is now walking is absolutely incredible
inedible but it doesn't stop there since
I don't need these other controllers I'm
just going to turn off their visibility
for a second and show you that we've got
this new one that can be placed anywhere
this is for the walk cycle there are so
many parameters in this effect that
allow you to change how the walk
actually looks first and foremost I want
to go all the way down to the bottom
into the computation and point out that
this is where you're going to find out
how long your cycle duration is in both
seconds and Frames this is how I knew to
set the duration to 1 second by default
that's how long the loop is going to be
of your walk cycle changing these other
parameters though might change that
duration so if you're ever having
trouble finding that Loop point just
take a look at the cycle duration in
frames and then take one frame off of
that number for your work area out so 23
instead of 24 because the 24th frame
will be the same as the first frame of
the cycle but let's close that up and
just walk through a few of these
controls first we have General motion
Walk and Run and there are some notes in
here to explain what all of this means
but General motion is going to take
whatever is being automated and
basically just turn it off so I can dial
this back and we're going to get back to
that neutral pose aside from the arms
but we'll talk about why that is in a
second so if it's at zero we're not
going to be walking or if I go to the
walk and I turn that down to zero same
thing we're going to get to our neutral
pose however if I turn run up to 100
then it's going to animate my character
in a Run Cycle instead of a walk cycle
and there are some weird things
happening don't worry about that yet the
point is General motion will turn both
of these off whereas the Walk and Run
individually will control just those two
cycles next up are the main parameters
and this is where you can change things
about your character like the height the
energy and the softness and really the
best way to understand what these do is
to just get in here and modify them then
play it back to see how it looks I don't
typically touch the height control but
the energy will drastically change your
walk so if I double that number my
character is going to have a lot more
movement a lot more exaggeration as he's
walking if I pause on any one of these
frames and increase the softness you'll
notice that that is affecting everything
from the torso up so nothing to do with
the legs I'll leave both of those back
to their default and collapse that up
and move to the next section which is
walk cycle now this is where we can
change how fast the character is walking
so if I go to a frame where the legs are
spread out right about there and I
change the walk speed you'll notice that
this is actually increasing the distance
between steps but the animation is
happening in that same 24 frame cycle so
you might not think of this as walking
faster but because the feet are
traveling more distance in the same
amount of time that's exactly what's
happening the other thing the walk speed
can change is the direction of the walk
so if your character was facing the
other direction and you rigged it up
that direction sometimes your character
will be walking in the wrong direction
this is simply corrected by inverting
the number so if I change the walk speed
to -00 my character is now going to walk
backwards instead of forwards so that's
how you can correct your walk cycle if
your character is moving in the wrong
direction now the other thing we can
change is the walk type so let me change
the walk speed back to 100 I can go from
realistic to dancing and this is going
to have kind of a double bounce walk
cycle which is a little bit more
cartoony it adds more personality it's
really fun I'm going to change that back
to realistic and close up walk cycle
we'll take a look at the Run Cycle in a
little bit next up is the individual
limb adjustments so for the neck and
head I could go in I could change how
much the head is bobbing up and down or
how much the neck is swinging back and
forth these are all parameters that
influence how the walk cycle happens
they're not used to pose your character
if you want to change the pose of your
character you could reenable your
controllers and change them so I could
grab this position for the body
controller and drop it down a little bit
or maybe shift it forward and rotate him
forward a little bit and everything is
going to dynamically update it's not
breaking any part of the Walk cycle so I
can move his head forward and down a
little little I could rotate his head
down and then I could preview one more
time and the walk cycle is going to
adapt to whatever I've set now the arms
are not swinging the way that I would
like them to I think the front arm is
actually okay but the back arm is going
really far back and you'll notice that
the hand controllers here actually
aren't moving at all if I click and drag
they're no longer controlling the limbs
and that's because there are two
different systems for driving a limb
with doick and that's ik or FK and that
stands for inverse kinematics and
forward kinematics you can Google that
find other YouTube videos on what those
two things mean if you want specifics
but basically ik is what allows us let's
say in the rig comp to just move the
hand and have the arm Bend and move
around the way that you would expect it
to FK forward kinematics is basically
just a parent chain and you can see that
the ik FK switch is disabled meaning
that this is now an FK system instead of
ik so if I twirl open FK there are going
to be key frames set on all of these
properties but that was just necessary
for building the walk cycle I can
actually get rid of them now what this
allows me to do is rotate any one part
of this limb to change how it looks and
do it takes care of the rest so what I
want to do is actually Target the back
arm the left arm go into that FK
settings remove those key frames and
then rotate the upper part of the limb
forward a bit so that it comes out more
on this part of the walk and then
doesn't go back quite as far as it
swings backwards so now my arms are a
little bit more aligned to where I want
them to be as the character is walking
now this character's proportions are
very exaggerated and he has very long
legs so I would like to see the legs
travel more distance but instead of
doing this with the walk speed property
I'm going to go down into the advanced
parameters and find the step amplitude
and step frequency so let's go back to
the first frame where the legs are
basically at their two extremes and I'm
going to increase the step amplitude to
push the distance between those legs
legs out much further I'll also disable
all these other controllers and play
this back just so we can see how the
walk cycle has
updated so now he's traveling much more
distance much more quickly so what I
probably want to do is turn the step
frequency down to maybe let's say 70% so
he won't be walking quite as
fast however that has changed my cycle
duration so let me go to the computation
I'll see cycle duration is now 34 frames
so I'm going to go to frame 33 we can
see the frame number right here set my
work area and preview that now my
character's got a nice easy long-legged
walk cycle I think that looks really
great but what I am noticing is that
when the legs stretch out they become
perfectly straight and the knees are
kind of popping as they go in and out of
that straight State and I want to try to
remedy that a little bit so let me bring
up my body controller and I'll find a
frame where the leg is completely
extended so that's the first frame of
the Walk cycle and I'll just click and
drag this down a little bit and I don't
want to shift it too far forward but
maybe somewhere with a balance between
these two legs cuz really at this point
I want both legs to be pretty much
extended to their extremes so I did push
him forward quite a bit if I bring up
the position for this layer it's now 86
pixels forward and almost 20 pixels down
but if I play this back we should see a
lot less snapping on the legs now it
looks like this leg right here on the
second and third frames of the Walk ccle
is getting completely extended so I'm
just going to drop it down slightly more
maybe move it back a little bit I'm
using my arrow keys to do this just
until we remove that extension of the
leg and I think this is working a little
bit better obviously you can play around
with this as much as you want to get a
pose looking the way that you want it to
look and all these parameters affect
each other so you may have to do a lot
of going back and forth to see what
creates the best result but I think this
is doing a pretty good job of creating a
smooth walk cycle
that's the basic gist of all the
controls of the Walk cycle so now that
we know how to do this let's actually
make something happen with our
characters and I want to challenge you
to actually do this part of the process
and share your work tag me at Jen motion
on Instagram and Twitter so I can see
your work and I can share it you can use
the character artwork that I provided in
this tutorial as is or modify it change
the hairstyle change the colors do
whatever you want but share your work so
that I can see it and go ahead and tag
dff while you're at it so he can see it
as well at RX laboratory what I want to
do is go into my animation Cycles I'll
go to the start of my composition and
I'll set a key frame on the general
motion and press U to bring up that key
frame I'll zoom in here and move this to
the 1 second Mark then on the first
frame I'm going to change this down to
0% so what I've effectively done is key
framed on the walk cycle from no walking
to walking at 100% so this is actually
going to gradually move the feet and
naturally turn into a walk cycle over 1
second so actually let's move these key
frames forward 1 second in time so that
we have a second of my character not
walking before he is walking the issue
is since I move the controllers around
he's in a really weird stage without the
walk cycle enabled so what I want to do
is line up some key frames going from my
neutral pose to this pose that works
with the walk cycle over that same time
period so I'll go to this key frame
where the walk cycle is happening and
I'll set a key frame on the position for
the body controller as well as the
rotation for the body controller
everything else should be zeroed out
except for it looks like the head so I'm
also going to set a key frame on the
position for that let's bring up the
rotation and check that as well the head
is also rotated so I'll set a key frame
there the arm controllers don't matter
remember because they're being driven by
FK now and the Lays are only showing
these numbers because of the Expressions
that are driving the walk cycle if I
click on either value you'll see that
there are Zer comma Zer so I haven't
shifted those around so these should be
the only key frames I need for that
particular point in time I'll press you
to bring up all the key frames and I can
actually get rid of these ones on the
hands so we've got position and rotation
key frames for the body and the head
then I'll go back to this first key
frame and change these values to zero on
both the position and the rotation for
both the body and the head so we're now
back in our neutral position except for
those arms so once again let's go back
to the second key frame into one of the
arms into the FK I'll set key frames for
the upper lower and end and I'll do that
for the other hand as well select both
layers and press U this is where I want
these values to be set at this point in
time I'll back up to this first pose and
then just change these values so that
the arm is bent and posed in the way
that I want it to be so arm basically
hanging down at rest that looks pretty
good the back arm is hidden mostly by
the Torso but I'll rotate it out just a
little bit to give a better silhouette
and now we're going to transition from
this pose into the walking pose while
also enabling the walk cycle and I could
even easy ease everything I'll leave the
walk cycle as it is but I'll just easy
ease all the other key frames and then
I'll play this back so we can see what
it looks like resting for 1 second and
then transitioning into a walk cycle
that looked really good now why don't we
let it walk for a few seconds so we'll
go forward and we'll say let's walk walk
walk let's say we'll go to about 4
seconds I'm going to change this from a
walk cycle to a Run Cycle so I'm going
to set a key frame for both the walk and
the run and then go forward another
second we'll go to 5 seconds in the comp
and I'll just change these two numbers
from 100 to zero and from 0 to 100 and
now my character looks like he's ice
skating so I will need to key frame some
other things but we've transitioned now
from walking to running and it looks
pretty wacky if I play this back the
limbs are going to separate his legs are
rotating way too much much but we can
remedy this so let's also go into maybe
the step amplitude and key frame that so
let's set a key frame right there for
step amplitude and then we'll go forward
and the legs are just separating way too
much here so let's bring that in maybe
we'll go all the way back down to 100
and we'll see what that looks like so
I'll just set my work area to only prove
you the Run Cycle and play this
back and that was probably a little bit
too much so let's bring that back up a
little bit so the amplitude brings the
legs out a little bit more and I think
the step frequency is also going to need
to change so let's key frame that from
70 back up to 100 so that the Cadence of
the running actually matches the motion
a little bit more that's looking pretty
good maybe bring down the amplitude a
little bit so I'll say 150 instead of
180 yeah that's looking pretty good
maybe I'll key frame the pose of the
body controller a little bit so let's
grab that body controller set some key
frames so that they're holding until
this point and then go forward and we'll
rotate it down a little bit
more and drop the body down a little bit
more so he's lower to the
ground it might be a little bit too low
and there's some weird stuff going on
with the feet so I think we're going to
need to modify that a little bit so
let's go into the animation Cycles down
into the leg section and find the feet
rotation maybe we'll just key frame this
from 100% down to maybe 50% somewhere
around there that looks pretty good and
let's play that back yeah that's working
pretty well maybe I'll shift his body
forward even further and rotate it down
more I think that looks great so why
don't we have him run for a couple of
seconds so we'll say he's running
running running and then maybe right
around let's see the 7se second Mark
we'll key frame the general motion as
well as any key frames on the
controllers so I'll just click and drag
all the way down and then we'll go
forward let's say 2 seconds this time so
we'll go to the 9 second Mark and we'll
have them stop running and stop moving
all together so we'll key frame the
general motion down to zero and then
we'll copy and paste the initial set of
key frames for the controllers now I
can't select all these key frames and
copy and paste because that will paste
new layers but there's a really cool
feature of dock under the animation tab
called copy animation and paste
animation that lets us copy and paste
these key frames so with them selected
across multiple layers I'll say copy
animation and then I'll say paste
animation and that will paste right
where my playhead is and now we're going
to go back to where we were originally
at the start of our comp so that this
Loops seamlessly all right let's set our
work area and preview the entire
sequence I'll turn off the controller so
we just see the character and we'll see
him rest for a second transition into a
walk for a couple of Cycles then
transition into the run for a couple of
Cycles before coming to a resting Point
again and looping seamlessly now this
might seem like a really complex process
but believe me it's way more complicated
to do all of this manually setting he
frames for every single one of these
Cycles transitioning between them
gradually transitioning from one cycle
to another it's not easy it's very timec
consuming and while you do have much
more control key framing all this by
hand if you're in a pinch and you need
to get something done quickly maybe it's
a background character or the main
character even you can really get away
with a lot using this automatic walkand
Run Cycle System but that is my doick
Angela jump start tutorial I realized
this is a ridiculously long video but
there's just so much to know about doick
and even just getting into the basics
takes a lot of understanding so I hope
you got a lot out of this video if you
did like it please don't forget to like
the video subscribe if you're not
already leave a comment down below with
any questions or comments anything that
you'd like to learn more about doick I'd
be happy to make more content on this
subject if you use any of the techniques
that I taught you please tag Me @ jaken
motion on Instagram on Twitter anywhere
that you can so that I can see and share
your work and please share this video
with other people that you think might
like it if you're interested in more
tutorials like this one then please
consider becoming a patron over on
patreon you can click on the card above
to take you over there thank you so much
to my patrons for all of your continued
support it means the world to me thank
you so much for watching this video and
I'll see you in the next one